---
layout: project
title: Plain Text
category: minimal-computing
type: book
tags:
- Dennis Tenen
sparkle: plain-text-prog.txt
image: mobi.png
caption: "Malicious PDF Injection"
---

Plain text is a file format containing nothing but a "pure sequence of
character codes." In technical terms, it stands in opposition to *fancy text*:
"text representation consisting of plain text plus added information."[^ln-uni]
The book unfolds a history of and an argument for plain text. In making my
case, I argue that "other information" routinely embedded in all forms of
contemporary textuality includes much more than instructions for "font size"
and "paragraph justification." Increasingly, devices that mediate literary
activity encode specific models of governance and control.

The central concern of the book is to dispel the illusion of verisimilitude
between text on paper and text on the screen. The words may look the same, but
the underlying material affordances of the medium differ in significant
details. As an obvious example, consider a news report that changes slightly
based on the reader's location; or an e-book reader device that highlights
popular passages. For a literary scholar, such instability of means analysis
cannot be confined to reading for meaning alone. How will close reading
persist, when the reading device reconfigures a text dynamically: to fit
individual taste, mood, or politics?  The formulation of this narrowly
literary-theoretical concern opens the way to the broader question of empowered
human--computer interaction.  Textual legibility, as I will argue, is crucial
to a critical understanding of what it means to remain human in a digital
world.

[^ln-uni]: The Unicode Consortium. *The Unicode Standard: Worldwide Character Encoding*, Version 1.0, Volume 1. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1990.

The book is structured along a trajectory that begins at the material
foundations of modern textual technology, moving from the level of circuit and
silicon, and reaching up, through levels of abstraction (files, folders, and
operating systems), towards the reader. In following that path, I reconstruct
the passage of an electron from the mechanical action of the keyboard, to
magnetic storage medium, and to liquid crystal, that together give rise to
pixels, letters, and words. In using this approach, my book introduces a method
of literary microanalysis. Where distant reading perceives patterns across
large-scale literary copora, microanalysis breaks textuality down to its minute
constituent components. It is at this level, that I find that readers and
writers are in danger of becoming fundamentally alienated from the immediate
material contexts of knowledge production.
